+++
title = "My New iPhone Sucks"
date = 2017-12-20T11:12:17Z
tags = [ "iphone", "apple", "opinion" ]
categories = [ "essay" ]
comments = true
+++

{{<figure src="./images/rotten-apple.jpg">}}

I have always been a proud and happy iPhone user. My first smartphone was an
iPhone 3G and, although I had owned a couple Motorola flip-phones before that, I
consider it to be the first phone I *really* used. I had no complaints; from
when I first got it circa 2008 to when I decommissioned it in favor of the
iPhone 5, some 4 years later, it worked fairly well. Sure, towards the end of
its term the battery life sucked, I couldn't run some of the newer apps, and the
camera looked like a disabled potato; but it worked. The apps that I *could*
run, a combination of Skype, Google Maps (back than a built-in), Music, and
believe it or not, Phone, ran fairly well despite the age of the device. The
point is, I had, at a point, a 3-4 year old phone that *worked*, I only ever
replaced it when it fatefully died after being mistaken for a shoyu tray in a
dimly lit Japanese restaurant.

In 2012, following the death of my previous companion, I bought the iPhone 5. I
had no reason not to, my previous iPhone has lasted me a long time, and had
worked great in that period, it was well built and I enjoyed using it. Although
I never really owned other Apple products if not the iPhone, I had grown a
passive admiration for them. Their products were inarguably more expensive than
most competitors' (as is still the case), but they looked, both in software and
hardware, great and they *lasted*. Also, in 2012, and dramatically more so in
2008, the Android contenders were, in my opinion *absolutely hideous*. I hated
the Android UI/UX and I hated the looks of the phones even more. This all made
the choice of the iPhone 5 a nobrainer, specially since I had the money (not a
factor to be overlooked).

I wasn't disappointed. The iPhone 5 was absolutely great, specially when
juxtaposed to the ancient iPhone 3. The battery life was alright, it was thin
and light, the camera was great, and all my apps still worked! It was also
extremely resilient. Unlike with my iPhone 3, I did not use a case for my new
device, I liked how it looked too much and I find cases ugly, and yet it lasted
5 long years. Of course, by the end of its life it was full of dings and dents
on the aluminum casing and the screen had a scratch or two. I had a broken
screen I replaced, but that was my fault since I got hit by a car and got thrown
to the ground phone-first. The only functionality the phone lost, about 3 and a
half years in, was the camera. Somehow dirt had gotten inside the lens which
made the picture quality simply horrible. The battery life absolutely sucked
about 3-4 years in, and around that time too the lightning connector became
really finicky.

{{< figure src="./images/bad-image.jpg" caption="Look at that dirt!">}}

Despite all that, the phone worked. I carried a powerbank around to make up for
the short battery life and, since I was never much of a phone photographer
anyway, the camera didn't bother me. Most importantly, however, my apps all
worked, even towards the end of its life they all worked fluidly. Even Snapchat,
which is more demanding than you'd expect, worked well enough. Around April 2017
that phone died. I don't know what exactly happened, but it just wouldn't turn
on one morning. That same day I walked into an Apple store and bought an iPhone
7, the latest and greatest.

It was awesome. I loved the new design, the camera was amazing, TouchID was a
bliss, the battery lasted a lifetime comparatively, the screen looked super
sharp, I loved it. Also, the software was noticeably snappier. I was happy
having made yet another good choice purchasing an iPhone; it was a little more
expensive than some similar options, but the quality paid off. That happiness
didn't last though.

Fast forward to today, a mere 8 months after buying the iPhone 7, and I find it
borderline unusable. The phone is slow, I mean *really* slow. The apps I use
most frequently, Whatsapp and Snapchat, are so buggy and slow it drives me
insane. It's almost as if doing virtually *anything* equates to running Crysis
in the background, the animations are choppy, input has high latency, it's truly
dreadful. Now, just to reiterate, I'm not doing 4K video editing and
complaining, I'm sending messages and pictures of my dog, and even that is just
a horrible experience. I'm not sure what's causing this, and since I do not own
neither a copy of Windows nor an Apple computer I am unable to factory reset my
phone properly, so I'm not sure what to do. I might just go to an Apple Store
this week and try and get it replaced, because it has really begun to annoy me.

This is, to me, the break of a trust relationship between me and Apple. In this
relationship, I agreed to pay a premium for the iPhone, and Apple agreed to
provide me with a great experience; they clearly have not held their part of the
bargain, and neither will I from hereon after. Android phones have come a *long*
way. They look great, and the UI is now extremely beautiful, specially some
variants like One Plus' [*Oxygen OS*][oxygen-os].
Moreover, the recent FaceID flop (Unrelated Chinese coworkers being able to
unlock the others' phone, masks fooling it, and other dramatic flaws), together
with the absolutely staggering [macOS root-flaw][macos-flaw] have made
me lose faith in Apple as a company, at least for now. I'm not happy to be
leaving the iPhone and iOS behind, when they worked it was an absolutely dreamy
user experience, nor am I to settling on not getting a nice MacBook for work;
alas there's not much else to be done when the quality of Apple's products has
sunk so low.

[oxygen-os]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OxygenOS
[macos-flaw]: https://www.wired.com/story/macos-high-sierra-hack-root/
