+++
title = "Logic"
date = 2021-04-01T22:09:08-07:00
tags = [ "logic", "mathematics", "introduction" ]
categories = [ "essay" ]
draft = true
+++

Mathematics, much like any science, uses everyday language to express itself.
When we say, for example, "two is an even natural number," we are utilizing the
English language to construct a sentence that conveys a certain property about
certain mathematical beings. This sentence, of course, could have been said in
any other language, for example, Chinese, Danish, French, or Portuguese, or any
other. In this way, there is some similarity between the sentence "Two is an
even natural number", referring to mathematical beings, and the sentence "Jordan
is a great basketball player", referring to a popular sport. There is, however,
a fundamental difference between these two sentences, and it's this difference
that we shall analyze.

Suppose that, in a hip *caf√©* in downtown San Francisco, while sipping on a
Latte and eating some locally sourced, family made, cake, Daniel and Marissa
start discussing about basketball. In the heat of the moment, Daniel exclaims,
"LaVar Ball is an *excellent* basketball player!" Marissa, more for the pleasure
of contradicting rather than conviction, replies "That's absurd! LaVar was fine,
but he's nothing even close to an extraordinary player! Magic Johnson, Michael
Jordan, those were really extraordinary!" We shouldn't be bothered to report the
rest of the discussion, nor how the locally sourced cake found itself in
Daniel's nose or how the Latte ended in Marissa's right eye.

What's important here is that a discussion of this nature is unthinkable when it
comes to the sentence "two is an even natural number;" and not due to Daniel or
Marisa's lack of interest in mathematical questions, but rather because the
statement "two is an even natural number" is, without question, true, with no
margin for discussion. This is such due to us knowing how to define, exactly,
the even natural numbers, and us being able to verify that the number two fits
that definition. The issue with the sentence "LaVar Ball is an excellent
basketball player" is that we do not know exactly how to define what is meant by
"an excellent basketball player." Deciding whether someone is or not a
basketball player might just be possible; but to attribute to them the adjective
of extraordinary is entirely subjective.

With the example of those two sentences we hope to make the reader feel the
necessity of a much greater rigor in the mathematical language when compared to
everyday language. This is what takes us to think a little further about
mathematical language, studying the principles of Mathematical Logic.

The sentences we construct, both in mathematical and everyday language, involve
certain beings, each of which is designated by a convenient symbol, which in
this case we call designation.

---
This is a translation and adaptation of the absolutely great text [Mathematical Logic][original].

[original]: https://www.math.tecnico.ulisboa.pt/~fteix/CI2017_18_1S/logica.pdf
