+++
title = "Values"
date = 2021-04-01T22:12:55-07:00
tags = [ "values" ]
categories = [ "essay" ]
draft = true
+++
Introspect into most startups today, and you'll find many shared structures
among their bureaucracies. One such structures are company values, a document
that attempts to create a code of ethics for the organization. Values exist to
create an axiological hierarchy for the company, allowing individuals within it
to measure their actions against a standard of what is expected and preferred.
Beyond this, they exist to guide the incentive apparatus of the organization ---
values set the metrics for evaluating performance.

Values will, ideally, help guide employees decisions --- should I crunch to
deliver this on time, or is it better for me to start coordinating an extension
with the relevant parties? The company values should help you decide. Values,
then, ought to be actionable, they must help an employee choose a path when
facing a split road. If a company value cannot help an employee decide on which
course of action better aligns with the company's ethos, then it is not a useful
or true value.

One of the defining characteristics of a state is that it holds a monopoly on
violence. In a Rechtsstaat, the state lays claim to this monopoly on physical
violence through its claim to the enforcement of a set of laws, which themselves
derive from an ethical basis emerging from the society in question.
Fundamentally then, the Rechtsstaat's right-to-violence is rooted in society's
goals.

If we model the structure of the company through the lens of the Rechtsstaat
many similarities arise. Much like the state the company has a monopoly on
violence, except it is no longer physical but _economical_ in nature. Only the
bureaucratic apparatus of the company has the power to deprive you of your
income. That power is also derived from a set of laws, although usually these
are far less prescriptive than the ones present in a state of rights. Finally,
the laws that rule the company derive from its goals, usually those are various
versions of profit maximization.

In both companies and state there exists an interstice between goals and law,
this is where Ethics and values emerge. The fundamental function of values is to
bridge societal goals and rules. 

Converse to how values help employees make decisions that align with the
company's expectation, they too help the company make decisions regarding its
employees. While the law is the code that governments rule by, values ought to
be the code of companies. 
